- [Woman]: * I said left
and you said right *
- * You said black
and I said white *
- [Both]: * We're gonna
work it out tonight *
* I said day and
you said night *
* I said left
and you said right *
* You said black
and I said white *
* We're gonna
work it out tonight *
* If loving you is wrong
I don't want to be right *
* And I know I need you so *
- Men and women. We live on the
same planet, share the same
genes, sometimes even the same
bed. Does that mean we're really
the same? Science is beginning
to answer this important
question. But what if we
don't like what we hear?
Does this mean war?
- How was your day, sweetheart?
- Fine.
- Guess what happened today?
- What?
- You're not interested?
- Who says I'm not?
- We need to talk.
- Oh no.
- We never talk.
- We talk all the time.
- You're not listening to me.
- What did you say?
- Oh, forget it.
- OK.
- I won't say another word.
- If only...
- In the last 50 years, men and
women have probably said more to
each other than they did in the
previous 2 million years.
[ Howling ]
Gone are the days when men and
women could live together and
hardly say a word. These days,
if you want to get along, you
have to talk. But most couples
spend less than 15 minutes a
week talking about their
relationship. That's only
2.5 minutes a day.
And most men will admit they
can't wait until those minutes
are over.
And who do they blame for the
pressure to talk? That's right.
And the more women want to talk,
the more men take cover.
It's easy to joke about
chattering women and close-
mouthed men, but could these
clichés have a biological basis?
Could women be right when they
complain that men seem to be
speaking another language?
- Good morning.
- Six participants in the War of
the Sexes have agreed to take
part in what they think is a
day-long journalism workshop.
- You guys are going to learn
about broadcast journalism.
You're going to learn how to be
on radio, TV, all that
sort of stuff.
- What it really is, is a way
for us to observe how
differently men and women
use language.
- First of all, we're going to
have a good time today.
There's no eating of insects...
[ Laughter ]
- We were just discussing that.
- Or there's not a lot of
eating... No, no.
- Helping them are two
experienced broadcast
journalists: Francine Pelletier
and Jon Kelina.
- So good luck to everybody, and
the guys are going to go with me
this way.
- The men and the women will
form separate teams. By the end
of the day we'll see who are the
best communicators.
- Are you together with a
competitive woman?
- Very, very.
- I think he'll do really well.
Probably better than I will.
- She thinks that women are just
as powerful and good as men are.
- I'm gonna kick his butt today.
- Not that competitive.
She's more docile.
- Maybe today we'll see.
- Psychologist Deborah Saucier
will be analysing our series of
language exercises.
- One of the most interesting
features of language and how men
and women differ in what they
use is not so much the words
that they use - because studies
have shown that men and women
have equal vocabularies - but in
the way that they use language.
- Sociolinguist Deborah Tannen
will help us understand the
basis of language differences
between the sexes.
- Of course this is the question
I'm most often asked: "How much
of these differences are
cultural in origin, learned over
time growing up, and how many of
these differences are inborn,
genetic, biological in origin."
My first reaction to this is,
"Why are we so obsessed
with knowing?"
- Well, maybe because the stakes
are so high. Could we be
hard-wired to get our
signals crossed?
[ Record needle scratching ]
- A woman and a man are in a
restaurant and they're looking
at the menu, and he says,
"I think I'll have the steak."
And she says, "Have you noticed
here that they also have salmon?
You like salmon." And he's
annoyed and he says, "Will you
stop criticizing me and telling
me what to order!" And she says,
"I'm not, I'm not. I'm just
showing that I care."
Well, which is it? Yes, she does
care about him. Maybe the doctor
says he has high cholesterol and
he's to eat less red meat.
But to her, the meta-message is
closeness-distance. "I care
about you. I'm trying to make
sure that you eat the right
thing." And he's thinking of it
as this hierarchy dimension.
A mother tells a child what to
eat. The person who tells the
other one what to eat is taking
a one-up position. So they're
both there, but it's which one
you're focusing on.
- For our first challenge, our
participants think they're
learning to read from
a teleprompter.
- Of course what you're trying
to do is read out loud in a
natural way.
- And if ever you see
a mistake...
- The show must go on.
- But we've doctored the script.
The real test is how well they
can decipher it.
- "Dr. Michael Smith, general
"practitioner at the Montreal
"General Hospital...
- "...believes in integrating
"humor into his
"medical practice...
- "...and his prescription
"provokes a smile.
- We know with respect with sex
differences in reading, that
girls learn to read more easily
than boys do. They experience
fewer dyslexic problems than
boys do, and they tend to be
faster readers.
- "According to the information
"circulating...
on the internet..."
- "A recent study seems to
indicate that the order of..."
- "That in order to... to..."
- "...that the order of letters
in words is of no importance."
- "The only important thing is
"that the first and the last
"letters be in the right place.
"The rest can be in total
"disorder and you can always
read without problems."
- What we're seeing in this
situation is that the women are
reading the whole word.
They're focusing on the shape of
the word rather than the
individual constituents of the
words, the mixed up letters,
which is why they're able to
continue on and read these
things much better than
the men do.
- "It's because a human brain
"doesn't read each
letter itself..."
- "...but the word as a whole,
"at least for normal brains.
"Is this information really
founded?" Phew!
- "Is this information
really founded?"
[ Laughing ]
Oh God!
- The other thing we must
consider here is that women also
read more than men. So there
maybe a practice effect
here as well.
- "The only important thing is
that the first and... is..."
[ Laughing ]
- "To..." oh...
- "The only important thing that
"is that the first and lsat.
"It should be in the
right place."
- "The rest can be in total
"disorder and you can always
read without... problems."
- Two out of the 3 women were
able to easily ready the jumbled
text. Only one of the men could
do it at all.
We may not know why women are
better at language, but we can
see the proof of it every day,
as more and more women dominate
fields that highlight
language skills.
- There are people who are
public people.
- I'm Wendy Measley.
- ...speak out.
- We do what we're good at.
And so if we're good at
language, we tend to do things
that are easy for us to do.
- I find it a very
happy coincidence.
- Twice as many women work in
the fields of public relations
and communications. 75% of
primary and secondary school
teachers are women. More than
90% of librarians are women.
[ Applause ]
Is all of this proof that women
are naturally at ease with
language and that men are
secretly struggling?
- I'm not a reader, I've never
been a reader. I read
newspapers, I read magazines.
Reading novels? I don't have the
patience to get through all of
that language and all of that
stuff. I'm more a person who
really likes to get to
the point.
- We have to come to a consensus
of one great subject.
- We're going to do a bit of
brainstorming to try to
come up with ideas.
- And the theme is,
"to have or have not."
- That is the question.
- Women's ease with language has
helped them be creative with
words, and quick too.
For our second exercise, our
participants think they're going
to learn how to write for radio.
What we're really trying to see
is who can be more creative
with language.
- So, to have or have not.
To have or have not, what?
- It's a theme that allows you a
lot of room, I think.
- You gotta remember that to do
this sort of thing, we got to
have something that's going to
interest our audience...
- Do we have to pick a side, or
is it that whole "to have or
have not"? Are we picking
a side?
- You mean, "Do you want to be
rich or poor?" Is that it?
- That's a pretty easy choice.
- There's an old thing about
writing: write about
what you know.
- The guys are not going to like
this writing stuff.
[ Giggling ]
- I think we're in trouble
because my wife's a writer.
- Oh, we're in trouble. We lost.
- It may not be obvious, but
even written language has a sex.
A professor at the University of
Texas studying student diaries,
wrote a computer program that
can tell the sex of a writer.
- When I started this, I didn't
really see differences.
They felt different. You could
tell if a story was by a man or
a woman almost always. You could
feel it, but you couldn't put
your finger on it. I just didn't
know... I knew there were
differences, I just didn't see
them. It wasn't until we had
this computer program, and pow,
they start popping out.
A woman will often use words
like, "I think, I feel."
And males are more likely to
just say the fact.
Females also use more social
words in general. So they'll
talk about family, friends.
They'll use words that we call
communication verbs. Words like
talk, listen, etc., at much
higher rates than males.
Those kinds of words are used to
make a closer connection between
the speaker and the listener.
Part of it is women are
interested in human beings much
more than males are. Men use
"we" in this fascinating way.
And they use it at fairly high
rates, which is the way I talk
to my son. "You know Nick, we
need to take out the trash,"
which is really code for,
"You need to take out the
trash." Listen to male
politicians. They use "we" a
lot, but it's this kind of
distanced we. You don't know who
the "we" really is. It's not
this warm, inclusive,
fuzzy kind of "we".
Men and women really are looking
at the world through different
lenses. Is it biological?
Beats me. I'd probably put a
little money on it. But there
are differences.
- While the scientists try to
come up with answers, women
continue to whisper sweet
nothings, and men continue to
believe that actions speak
louder than words.
[ Door closing ]
- We are all trying to balance
two forces. One is closeness-
distance. Are we the same?
Are we different? How close are
we? How distant are we? And then
there's also the hierarchy
dynamic. We're also balancing
who's up, who's down.
So, for little girls, you have a
best friend, you spend a lot of
time talking, telling secrets...
Talk is the glue that keeps
relationships together.
It's your way that you monitor
how close or distant you are.
Boys tend to socialize very
differently. They play in larger
groups. It's the activity that's
central. And they're very
attuned not to who's in, who's
out, but who's up, who's down.
- The measure of success.
- The measure of success?
- Yes!
- Well, we're talking about to
have or have not, so having is
often equated with being
successful, but that's not
necessarily so because a lot of
people can have the Mercedes and
have the big house and have the
maids and servants and whatever
and be miserable in their lives.
- When women use language,
they're creating a community
within the group, and
acknowledging the presence of
others and acknowledging that
what they're saying is important
and valid.
- I know if you said to the
guys, "measure of success",
they're going to say money, how
much they know about sports,
what their golf score is,
what they shoot in golf.
That's going to automatically
come out of their mouth.
They don't think the same way
that we do in terms of success.
- OK, but let's think of
something else.
- When men are speaking to each
other, it tends to be very
agentic, that is to show
mastery of a skill, to make the
group... to vie for leadership
of the group, for instance.
- You can talk about children...
- All right, children.
- A job, even. You can talk
about goals.
- To have or have not
left your mark.
- OK.
- For men to be successful at
mating, they generally have to
have resources or power. This is
what the evolutionary
psychologists have found time
and time again.
- We've got sports, money...
You were just like bursting out
there. What were you
saying? Women?
- A job. Just a job...
- Sports, which is power and
money. Money, which is power and
money. And career, which can be
power and money. And in fact
the women discard those items
right away.
- It doesn't take money to be
happy, but a man will have a
hard time agreeing with that.
- So when you think to have or
have not, sports, you're
thinking what?
- What would I do on Sundays if
I didn't have sports?
[ Chuckling ]
- I agree, but my wife's found
many things for me.
[ All laughing ]
- In our exercise, the men came
up with 10 different subjects;
the women, with only one, albeit
with several variations. Not the
result most studies would
predict. But maybe something
else was at play here.
- The women were trying to
develop a communal attitude
towards each other. They were
valuing each other's points.
And so while they were only
developing one topic, they're
going very deeply into the topic
as a way of almost getting to
know each other.
- I speak the most at home.
My God, I never shut up.
I babble. I talk a lot, all the
time, no matter what.
- I'm a good listener.
- Yes. He has to be,
he has no choice.
- You have 30 seconds to say...
- ...as many words as you can
that start with "Th". Go.
- If you want to see the effects
of sex differences in language,
look no further than school,
where boys are seriously
lagging behind.
In primary school, boys are
twice as likely as girls to have
trouble reading and writing,
and it's not just in Canada.
It's happening in every
developed country in the world.
Girls get higher grades than
boys, they drop out half as
often, and they get more post-
secondary degrees. Three cheers
for girls. But what's this
doing to boys?
- Extra! Extra!
- How does this language gap
come about? Could females have a
hormonal advantage? To find out,
a Cambridge University
researcher analyzed the
concentration of the hormone
testosterone in the amniotic
fluid of pregnant women.
- We had about 70 mothers who
were all having amniocentesis,
where they take the amniotic
fluid from the womb.
So we measured the testosterone.
Comes from both the male and
female fetus, and later we
followed the child when they
were 18 months old to see the
size of their vocabulary.
We found that in children that
had higher levels of pre-natal
testosterone had a smaller
vocabulary. We think there may
be a link between the hormone,
brain, and language, because the
more testosterone the fetus is
producing, the faster the right
hemisphere of the brain
develops, and correspondingly,
the slower the left hemisphere.
And of course language is
usually in the left hemisphere.
So it may just be that this
hormone is affecting language
development by affecting the
rate of the development of the
left hemisphere.
- Boys get a big boost of
testosterone when they reach
adolescence. Could this
account for all those
grunting monosyllables?
- Ugh!
- For our third exercise, our
participants think they're
getting warmed up for an
interview, but they're really
being tested on their
verbal ability.
- Are you ready?
- Give me as many words...
- "Th" words...
- ...as you can.
- Standby.
- You got 30 seconds
to do it, OK?
- Go.
[ All speaking rapidly ]
- The, that, this.
- Thick.
- Think.
- Thatch, thumb.
- "Th" is actually a huge word
category. And what we think is
going on, is that they're able
to access these categories of
words more rapidly. Maybe they
overlap more for women then they
do for men.
- Through.
- Through, yeah!
- Throw.
- Thigh... Uh...
[ Speaking rapidly ]
- What is interesting as well to
note in this, is how quickly
they go through similar things.
So the one woman starts with
"that, this, those", etc.
- Thou, thee,
thus, therefore...
- Thoroughly. But I've
said that about 14 times.
- And then once they move onto a
different category, then boom,
boom, boom. And you can see them
skipping from category to
category more quickly then
the men are.
- Thank you.
- Thank you! That's a good one.
Thank, think, thunk.
- Th.. Th...
- That's it! All right.
- That was brutal.
- In just 30 seconds, the men's
team were able to say about
20 words starting with "Th",
while the women were able to say
39, almost twice as many.
- This ability to generate lists
of words that are related to
each other may in fact be
innate. We see that this happens
very early in development.
Little girls are much better at
this than little boys. And we
see changes with hormones as
well, suggesting that this is
probably something that's
not necessarily learned
or practiced.
- I most often hear from women
it's all cultural, and if you
say there's anything biological,
it's because you're putting
women down and you're trying to
hold women back. And it's most
often from men that I hear it's
all biological and if you say
there's a cultural component,
it's like you're trying to blame
me that women aren't all the
CEOs, when I know that it's
really biological. My personal
opinion, and it is really only
an opinion, is that it's
probably an inextricable
combination of cultural and
biological factors.
- In language, as in other
behaviors, it's difficult to
separate culture from biology,
nature from nurture.
Take something as common as
toys. Why do girls play with
dolls, and boys with trucks?
A psychologist at Texas A&M
University did research on toy
choice using monkeys.
- We were interested in
determining if there were
factors other than socialization
that could contribute to
children's preferences for toys.
So what we decided to do was go
to a species where we knew that
there weren't these social
pressures to play with
particular toys.
A monkey does not know the
functional significance of the
truck. For that matter, the
doll. And if they showed
preferences that were similar
to children, then we could
argue that there were factors
other than socialization
that contributed to
those differences.
What we found was that the
preferences that monkeys show
were very similar to the
preferences that children show.
That the boys preferred the
truck and the females
preferred the doll.
It has strengthened my belief
that biological and social
factors may work in a
complementary fashion in
some instances. That we are
socializing people in a way that
is consistent with these little
pushes that we might get from
biological factors. So they're
not really in opposition,
which makes it really hard to
tease them apart.
- Our culture is something that
we learn from the time
we're very small. And I think
many of us prefer that it be
cultural so that we can change
it. And in fact, cultural
conditioning is very hard to
change. But at the same time we
can change cultural conditioning
if we try really hard. But we
can also change what's
biologically given. So it's a
question that's intriguing to
think about, but it's probably
more important to understand
what are the patterns so that we
know how to deal with them, than
it is to try to pick apart which
part comes from what.
- And technology hasn't changed
anything. Research shows that
women use the telephone twice
as much as men.
And man, the tool-user, prefers
to commune with his gadgets.
So even if the tools have
changed, men and women still
maintain their age-old divide.
- What we get to do now...
- ...is a short, live
television interview.
- It's one-on-one.
- You have what's called
a telex in your ear...
- ...to keep you informed
of where you are.
- OK, but he's not going to be
doing anything weird?
- They're not going to tell you
dirty jokes.
- Women are the queens of multi-
tasking. They can manage a dozen
things at once, and not
skip a beat.
[ Phone rings ]
Men prefer to do one
thing at a time.
[ Glass breaking ]
And fix one thing at a time.
For our fourth exercise, our
participants think they're
learning how to conduct a TV
interview. This time we'll be
testing how well they can listen
and talk at the same time.
- You have to put this
telex in your ear.
- Just nod if you can
hear me, Christine.
- Can I hear you?
- Yes, Sean. Can you
hear me clearly?
- Yes.
- This is cool!
- Whoops!
- The show goes on.
- Rookie.
- That's OK, Bob. Just put it
back in there.
- Linda? Can you hear me now?
- Yeah, I can hear you.
That's creepy.
- I'm your guide, Alan.
- Somehow I have a feeling no
matter what, you're going to
talk to me just to see how you
can throw us off.
- Go ahead, Rita.
- OK. Francine, I wanted to
examine with you today some of
the gender-based
considerations...
- Do men have a hard time paying
attention, or do they just have
a different approach
to listening?
- One of the most frequent
complaints that women make about
relationships with men is,
"He doesn't listen to me."
And this is something that has
intrigued me a lot over time,
and I've come up with a few
patterns that might
explain this frustration.
So the typical situation for
little girls when they're
talking to each other, and you
see this among adult women too,
is to look right at each other,
keep this direct face-to-face
gaze, lean in. And so it's this
very focused gaze. And among
little boys, older boys, and
men, the pattern that I found is
they typically will sit at
angles, or even side-by-side.
Now, if you have a woman talking
to a man, and she keeps looking,
trying to get him to look at
her, and he's looking somewhere
else, she thinks he's not
listening because he's not
looking at her. Sometimes of
course, he may not be listening,
but the very fact of not looking
does not seem to carry that
meaning of not listening for men
as it does for women.
- So sometimes it may look like
a man isn't listening,
but his brain is still
processing language.
[ Woman clears throat ]
[ Laughter ]
Well, not always.
Thanks to research using the
latest in magnetic resonance
imagery, we can now pinpoint the
exact part of the brain that men
and women use to understand
language. The experiment
involved listening to an audio
tape, first backwards,
and then forwards.
- We compare what the brain does
when listening to the story
forward, to what the brain does
listening to the story backward.
And the reason why that's
important is because when you
listen to a story forward, you
have comprehension of language,
because it's normal speech.
When you listen to it backwards,
you have the exact same sounds,
and everything else that your
brain does to process that
sound, expect for the
comprehension of speech.
So we're able to select out
the areas of brain that
are responsible for
comprehensive speech, or
understanding language.
One of the things we noticed
early on was that we got a
different response when we put
men in and when we put women in.
Men tended to show this very
localized activity in the left
side of the brain, which is the
traditional area that we think
of as being dominant for
listening or dominant for
speech. Women tended to show
activity on both sides of their
brain in this area of the
temporal lobe, which is
responsible for listening to
language. This result suggests
that the normal structures used
for men and women in listening
are probably different. And that
may indicate a different process
inside the brain.
- Like the process inside the
corpus callosum, the part of the
brain that transmits information
from one hemisphere to the
other, women have a greater
number of nerve fibres
connecting the two sides.
- There may be some differences
in brain development between men
and women. That's been suggested
by people in the past, and the
debate has gone back and forth
for a long time.
- So, do these biological
differences make women
better listeners?
- As a man with a wife and
4 daughters, I've been told on
multiple occasions that I don't
listen as well as other people,
so from that standpoint, yes.
That's a personal observation,
but it says nothing about the
native ability of men or women
to listen to things.
- He and Nick Auf der Mar...
- And how well will our
participants listen, especially
when they have to talk at the
same time?
- Alan, you're on.
- Thanks Jon, for coming.
- Nice to be here.
- Uh, I know you've been a
veteran journalist for
30 years now...
- ...come into the business
all over again.
- Rita, your voice sounds a
little dry. Take a sip of water.
- Do you think that you have to
become better as a broadcaster
because you're an older female?
- Good question.
- So there's a challenge as
being a woman...
- Christine, that's enough on
gender challenges.
Talk about age.
- Is there an age challenge as
well in broadcasting?
- Along the way--
- OK Robert, skip to the next
question. Go with the next
question right now.
- Sorry. Heh heh! How do you
feel about the, speaking of
news, how do you feel about the
news coverage in Iraq...
- There is expressive
and receptive language.
Expressive is what I'm doing
right now. Receptive is
listening. And these take part
in different parts of your
brain. And so to be able to
listen and speak at the same
time, actually requires an
integration of these two parts
of your brain. And we see that
men are having a harder time
doing this.
- You said something--
- Sean, you have sweat on your
right earlobe. Wipe it off.
Go on. Go on with the interview.
- Is it still there?
- The show must go on, Sean.
Ask the next question.
- OK.
- So...
- Linda, uncross your legs and
remember to look Francine
in the eyes.
[ Linda talking at same time ]
- ...pleasant parts of your
career was your stint with the
magazine La Vie en Rose. And why
was that?
- What about...
- OK, Alan, go to
the last question.
- ...in terms of...
- We're short on time.
- ...what's happening today.
What do you see happening to
journalism in the future?
- 3 out of 3 of our female
participants figured out how to
deal with the earphone, and were
able to both listen and speak at
the same time. And as for the
men, well, they didn't
do so well.
- It's not easy when somebody's
speaking to you.
- Oh my God. You gotta learn to,
"Shut up back there!"
- "Jump to the last question."
Oh, all right.
- You just lost a couple of
years from your life, but you
did a good job.
- It's not as easy as I...
- So, if men can't listen to two
things at once, it isn't their
fault, it's just the way their
brains work.
[ Horses on TV, music ]
- If I'm listening to the radio,
and I want to talk, I just turn
down the radio, and then I talk.
So that kind of superfluous
noise bothers me. I could never
study in school while the radio
was on or the television was on.
It's got to be one thing
at a time.
- I can cook and speak at the
same time, and sweep at the same
time, and change the radio and
even sing at the same time.
- I can't cook, period.
- So, this exercise...
- We're going to have a debate.
- What do you think should be
the number one quality...
- We're getting to
meet the women.
- ...a journalist should have.
- Meet and beat the women, I'd
like to point out.
- In situations like a dinner
party, women can be
surprisingly intimate.
But this is an environment where
men really open up.
- I think many women feel quite
cautious about talking in a
public situation. You might say
the wrong thing. You might hurt
somebody's feelings. You might
spark a conflict which you'd
like to avoid. People might be
critical of you. They might
accuse you of talking too much.
For him, it's just the opposite.
Everything about the boy's
socialization encourages them to
put themselves forward
in that group.
- To find out more about the
difference between public and
private language, we asked our
participants to take part in a
debate. What we'll be observing
is which sex is more at ease
speaking in public.
- OK, we've selected the ability
to communicate as the key
characteristic for a good
journalist because essentially,
communication is the nucleus of
this profession. You have to be
able to take an idea, to
articulate it, to sell it to
your audience, and to get your
point across in a succinct and
clear manner as possible. In a
nutshell. Thank you.
[ Applause ]
- Well, that's true. I guess
what we feel is, "Why do we
watch the news in the first
place?" Because we need to be
informed. The number one quality
of a journalist of any form, we
feel, is knowledge.
- We know that men speak more
often in public and more
frequently. So not only do they
speak for longer periods of
time, but they're more likely to
interrupt each other,
or other women.
- You may be able to communicate
a story, but if you don't know
anything about it, what are you
communicating? You know
what I mean?
- Hello, research? You go out
and you do your research.
You don't have to
already know it.
- That's knowledge.
- No, that's going to acquire
knowledge. Why are you going to
acquire knowledge?
- That's secondary,
it's not primary.
- The goals of public speech for
women is often to establish
intimacy and to show communion
with each other, that "Yes, I
understand what you're saying.
I might be different, but I
value your position."
- There's absolutely no denying
that knowledge and gathering
knowledge is key to the ability
to communicate well.
But essentially the role of a
journalist is to get a point
across. Would you disagree?
- The goals for men are a little
different, subtly different.
They're to dominate each other
to establish hierarchy. So I can
perhaps say to you, "Yes, your
idea is fine, mine is better."
- You're presenting very well.
The 3 of you look very good
there. You're presenting very
well, but go ahead and talk to
me about nuclear physics.
Any one of you. Feel free,
go ahead.
- There's a subtle difference
there between saying, "Yours is
just as good as mine, but I'm
sticking with my point" versus,
"Yours is fine, but mine
is better."
- If I had the opportunity to do
some research on nuclear
physics, I could very
effectively communicate--
- Well, you're just backing up
our point. That's the most
important thing.
- You got the knowledge first.
- You need to go find the story.
- I would have expected that the
men would excel at this and that
they would dominate the
conversation and take more time
than the women would. It's what
we see in the research.
- News is facts.
- News is facts. Journalism is
presenting the facts. Can I just
stand up and say that, because I
think that's a very valid point.
News is fact, delivering the
news is journalism.
- No.
- The women are actually doing
OK. In fact, one of the women
relies on personal experience
with her job to suggest that,
"No, I actually know this better
than you."
- I'm a communicator in my real
life. I write policy material
for a major bank. My job is to
gather information and decipher
it and translate it in such a
way that my audience is going to
understand it. So yes, I need
to research, I need to know my
subject, absolutely. But I need
to be able to communicate
it effectively.
- We see that this woman is very
confident, very fluent, very
elegant in her speech.
- If you can't understand the
message that this person is
trying to deliver, even though
he's as knowledgeable as
can be-- Let me put it to you
another way. Because you have
all the information that you
need on a subject, means you
know what you're talking about.
It does not mean that you know
how to talk about it.
- The fact that the women are
becoming more confident may be
indicative of some of the
changes we're seeing in the
workforce, and that our culture
is actually changing our
abilities, and our abilities to
speak in public.
- We're not saying we're better
communicators, we're just saying
that's what you need.
- [Male moderator]: Ladies and
gentlemen, I'm glad that we have
picked such a good topic.
Even though we were right...
- Let's take it outside!
[ Laughter ]
- Although things may be
changing in society, in the
course of our debate, the men
spoke more than the women,
used more words, and
interrupted more frequently.
Classic differences between men
and women in public speech.
- I think some people are
uncomfortable with the
description of differences
between women and men for a
number of reasons. For one
thing, it seems like we're
making too much of them.
There are so many ways that
we're the same, and if we focus
on what's different, we're
driving a wedge between us.
There can be a discomfort that
what we're describing
is "typical"...
...can sound like we're saying
it's "normal". And so anyone who
doesn't fit that typical pattern
is being told they're not
normal, there's something wrong
with you. And I think there can
be a discomfort too that if
we're saying women and men are
different, we may be justifying
the inequality in our culture,
and we may be denying even
social injustice. And so it can
be heard as, "Well, women and
men are different, so if women
don't get promoted as often as
men do, it's because there's
something different about them.
They don't deserve it, they
don't want it, they're not as
good at it." I feel it's
important to describe the
differences if they're there, so
that we know what we're
dealing with.
- What about the Internet?
That was supposed to be a brave,
new, gender-free world where men
and women would be equal.
Dr. Susan Herring, a linguist,
has collected hundreds of posted
messages and analyzed the way
men and women were writing on
the Internet. And she found the
brave new world of cyber
relations was neither
brave nor very equal.
- I found that there were some
very striking differences
between the messages of the men
and the women. The women's
messages on average were between
one and two screens long.
Men's messages were often 10 or
even 20 screens long. And women
would sometimes apologize if
their message was only two
screens long. They would say,
"Sorry for such a long message."
But a man, I never saw an
example of a man apologizing for
the length of a message, even
when it was 20 screens long.
Men are more likely to engage in
directly challenging statements.
Men are more likely to baldly
state, "That's wrong."
Or, "You're wrong." Women are
more likely to hedge or phrase
their disagreement indirectly.
It may be more difficult to tell
that women are in fact
disagreeing, because they're
phrasing it in such
a polite way.
There are many similarities
between what I found in terms
of gender differences on the
Internet, and what other
researchers had found previously
for spoken language, face-to-
face communication. In both
cases, we see men being more
confrontational, more
comfortable with confrontation,
than women, and women being more
apologetic, more tenuous in
their communication style,
and also more supportive of
one another. So in those
senses, I think the patterns
are very similar.
Maybe what's most surprising
about that, is that there was an
expectation that all of that
would disappear on the Internet.
And not only did it not
disappear, but it seemed to be
perfectly reproduced, which
raises interesting questions
why people feel the need to
reproduce those kinds of almost
stereotypical behaviors in a
new environment which actually
allows for great anonymity
in theory.
Gender is very deeply rooted in
all of us. It's a very deep part
of our identities, that we don't
slough that off so easily.
- Ladies and gentlemen, now we
have the mud wrestling.
[ Laughter ]
- Taking the day-long workshop
as a whole, one team won the day
and proved themselves most at
ease with language.
- And it is...
[ Women cheering ]
- Now, is that a surprise?
I didn't think so. Language
sounds an awful lot like
communication, eh?
- Well, there you go, although
you were wrong about that point.
[ Laughter ]
- If the differences are there,
we need to acknowledge them so
we can address them. If we
don't, it's like you're sweeping
something under the rug and
eventually you're going to start
tripping over the bumps in
the rug, and they send
you sprawling.
- Men may be learning to connect
with women and speak their
language, but women have had a
lot more practice. And if women
have been gabbing away since the
dawn of humanity, it shouldn't
be a surprise that they're
better at it than men, who are
never that interested in talking
in the first place.
- Discussing differences isn't
to deny issues of social
justice. It's to have more tools
at our disposal to address those
issues and change the things
we're not happy with.
- What it all comes down to is
that men and women may speak
different languages, but we've
only just started talking.
And you know what they say:
the first 500,000 years
are the hardest.
Next time, the War of the Sexes
gets into uniform to see if men
or women are the most natural
leaders. Power: does it
have a sex?
- Attention!
- I don't think there's anything
more important to understanding
human nature than understanding
how people compete and how
they cooperate.
- You climb up the rope, and
down the other side and onto
there. Let's go.
- Seriously?
- Yeah, right now!
- Are we building something?
Help me out here.
- Are you lying to me, cadet?
- Do you have a belt with you?
No belt or no tie. Sheesh, we're
gonna have to send you back
home. OK...
Closed captions: Global Vision